[SYCL][Docs] Add SYCLBIN feature and format design document (#16872)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/design/SYCLBINDesign.md

| `uint32_t` | SYCLBIN version number.                                            |                |

#### Global metadata

Immediately after the header is the global metadata segment of the SYCLBIN,
containing information about the contained SYCLBIN file.

| Type       | Description                                                        | Value variable |
| ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------- |
| `uint8_t`  | `sycl::bundle_state` corresponding to the contents of the SYCLBIN. |                |

The `sycl::bundle_state` is an integer with the values as follows:

| `sycl::bundle_state` | Value |
| -------------------- | ----- |
| `input`              | 0     |
| `object`             | 1     |
| `executable`         | 2     |

### Body

Following the global metadata is the body of the SYCLBIN file. The body consists
of a list of abstract modules.

| Type       | Description                                | Value variable |
| ---------- | ------------------------------------------ | -------------- |
| `uint64_t` | Byte size of the list of abstract modules. | `B`            |

> | `B`        | List of abstract modules.                  |                |

Author: Originally, "Type" was just a size-specification, but I seem to have forgotten to change them to a proper type. I believe it should be something like `char[B]` instead.

#### Abstract module

An abstract module is a collection of device binaries that share properties,
including, but not limited to: kernel names, imported symbols, exported symbols,
aspect requirements, and specialization constants.

The device binaries contained inside an abstract module must either be an IR
module or a native device code image. IR modules contain device binaries in some
known intermediate representation, such as SPIR-V, while the native device code
images can be an architecture-specific binary format. There is no requirement

> that all device binaries in an abstract module is usable on the same device or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that all device binaries in an abstract module are usable on the same device or
```

# SYCLBIN - A format for separately compiled SYCL device code

This design document details the SYCLBIN binary format used for storing SYCL
device binaries to be loaded dynamically by the SYCL runtime. It also details
how the toolchain produces, links and packages these binaries, as well as how

> the SYCL runtime library handles files of this format.

Author: I've added a motivations part here. Do you think it is sufficient?

(syclbin_format)=
## SYCLBIN binary format

The files produced by the new compilation path will follow the format described
in this section. The intention of defining a new format for these is to give
the DPC++ implementation an extendable and lightweight wrapper around the
multiple modules and corresponding metadata captured in the SYCLBIN file.
The content of the SYCLBIN may be contained as an entry in the offloading binary
format produced by the clang-offload-packager, as described in
[ClangOffloadPackager.rst](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/clang/docs/ClangOffloadPackager.rst).

The following illustration gives an overview of how the file format is
structured.

> ![SYCLBIN binary file format illustration](SYCLBIN_file_format_illustration.svg)

Author: The global metadata was merged into the header in this design, but I'm not against making it a separate entry.

As for the metadata for the different IR modules and native device code images, I left it out for simplicity, but I can try to fit it in the illustration.

> ![SYCLBIN binary file format illustration](SYCLBIN_file_format_illustration.svg)

Author: I have added another layer to the illustration as well as a global metadata segment.

> ### Header

Reviewer: I'd suggest a file format that is grouped by the type of each data structure.  This is similar to how ELF works.  For example:

```
[file header]
[abstract module header # 0]
...
[abstract module header # N]
[ir module header # 0]
...
[ir module header # N]
[device code header # 0]
...
[device code header # N]
[metadata entry # 0]
...
[metadata entry # N]
[string table]
[ir module contents]
[device code contents]
```

The headers then reference things they contain by their index and a count.  For example:

```
struct file_header {
  uint32_t magic;
  uint32_t version;
  uint32_t abstract_module_count;   // Total number of abstract module headers in SYCLBIN
  uint32_t ir_module_count;         // Total number of IR module headers in SYCLBIN
  uint32_t device_image_count;      // Total number of device code image headers in SYCLBIN
  uint32_t metadata_count;          // Total number of metadata records in SYCLBIN
  uint32_t string_table_size;       // Size (bytes) of string table
  uint32_t module_content_size;     // Size (bytes) of all IR modules
  uint32_t device_code_image_size;  // Size (bytes) of all device code images
  uint32_t first_metadata;          // Index of first global metadata record
  uint32_t metadata_count;          // Number of global metadata records
};

struct abstract_module_header {
  uint32_t first_metadata;     // Index of first metadata record for this abstract module
  uint32_t metdata_count;      // Number of metadata records for this abstract module
  uint32_t first_ir_module;    // Index of first IR module header for this abstract module
  uint32_t ir_module_count;    // Number of IR module headers for this abstract module
  uint32_t first_device_code;  // Index of first device code header for this abstract module
  uint32_t device_code_count;  // Number of device code headers for this abstract module
};
```

Author: Though I am always reluctant to doubt ELF, I don't see how that structure would be beneficial to our use-case. The currently proposed design makes the relation of metadata and modules/code a lot clearer, in my opinion. My reasoning for this is that there is a 1:1 relation between IR module metadata and their collection of raw bytes (same goes for native device code images.) That means, bundling them together means we don't need to duplicate information like  number of IR modules and number of IR module metadata entries. Likewise, it means that any parser does not need to make jumps when parsing a specific IR module.

The latter can of course be negative if we wanted to do selective module extraction, i.e. if we wanted to load only _some_ modules in a SYCLBIN, but I don't necessarily see that being the case and the difference would be minimal.

Reviewer 2: My guess is that in some time in the future we'll need selective module extraction. Probably because someone has a .syclbin with 10,000 modules and we need to optimize.  This is also why I think we need to be forward looking when it comes to alignment and padding.

Author: > My guess is that in some time in the future we'll need selective module extraction. Probably because someone has a .syclbin with 10,000 modules and we need to optimize. 

Even then, do we think there is much more benefit to making the entries leaps shorter? The number of indirections should be the same, but the structure would less associated. Granted, the indirections are closer together, meaning the cache might play ball a little better when doing selective reading, I still don't see a larger benefit to breaking the layered concept proposed here.

Reviewer: I agree with @cperkinsintel.  Using an ELF-like structure would make it more efficient to read just selected IR modules / device images from the SYCLBIN.  This is a likely scenario also.  Imagine you are creating a `kernel_bundle` from a SYCLBIN that contains device code images for Intel devices, CUDA devices, etc.  The `kernel_bundle` will be associated with some specific set of devices that are all from the same backend (because all of the devices must be contained in the kernel bundle's context).  Therefore, we really only need to read the IR modules / device images that are compatible with those devices.

The structure you propose now requires you to walk through the whole contents of the SYCLBIN file to figure out what IR modules / device images it contains.  Looking just at the IR Module representation as an example:

| Type          | Description                    | Value variable |
| ------------- | ------------------------------ | -------------- |
| `uint8_t`     | IR type.                       |                |
| `uint32_t`    | Byte size of the raw IR bytes. | `IB`           |
| `uint8_t[IB]` | Raw IR bytes.                  |                |

To find all the IR modules of a certain type, I need a loop that reads 40 bytes of "IR type" and "byte size", then seek forward `B` bytes in the file, read another 40 bytes, etc.  This is very inefficient because the data is spread out across many small blocks of 40 bytes.  It's much more efficient if you can read all the information you need in one contiguous block of memory.

The efficiency isn't so much at the cache level (though it exists there too).  It's at the memory page level and the disk block level.  It's better if all the data you need can be retrieved by doing a small number of reads from the file.  Alternatively, you may mmap the file into memory.  In that case, it's more efficient if all the data you need resides in a small number of memory pages.

An ELF-like structure solves this by locating all the "table of contents" information at the beginning of the file.  You can read a small amount of information from the start of the file, and then you know the type and location of all the IR modules / device images.  You can then seek forward in the file and read just those modules / images that you care about.  Alternatively, if you mmap the file, you can compute a pointer to the modules / images that you care about, and then the O/S will page in only those memory pages that contain those modules / images.

BTW, the mmap scenario is one reason why it's advantageous to naturally align fields in the file format.  If a `uint32_t` is always 4-byte aligned in the file, you can mmap the file and then read the `uint32_t` with an aligned load.

Reviewer 3: From my POV, using ELF saves maintenance costs on tools/libraries to manipulate custom format. For instance, https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/16873 adds new tool to examine the binary file. Using ELF format enables uses of existing tools like readelf and objdump to do the same task.

Potentially, we can re-use the code OpenMP offload team develops for Intel GPU support. FYI: https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/commit/f7b3559ce07c83625bbe81a30a4da8ccef9ab53f

Reviewer: Note that my proposed format above is not ELF.  It's "inspired by ELF".  I'm not sure how a SYCLBIN format would look if it really used ELF.  Would it be an ELF file with no host code (no .text section, etc.)?

The header segment appears as the first part of the SYCLBIN file. Like many
other file-formats, it defines a magic number to help identify the format, which
is 0x53594249 (or "SYBI".) Immediately following the magic number is the version
number, which is used by SYCLBIN consumers when parsing data in the rest of the
file.

| Type       | Description                                                        | Value variable |
| ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------- |
| `uint32_t` | Magic number. (0x53594249)                                         |                |
| `uint32_t` | SYCLBIN version number.                                            |                |

> | `uint8_t`  | `sycl::bundle_state` corresponding to the contents of the SYCLBIN. |                |

Reviewer 2: `uint8_t` will throw off the alignment of binary, making it more difficult to parse.  Let's make it a `uint32_t` like the others.

Author: It is correct that if you wanted to make alignment-based accessing of this binary, we would have to force-align to 64 bits. However, there is nothing in the current design requiring such alignment. We can do that, but even then we can do the alignment by padding. For layouts like strings we would need this anyway.

Reviewer 2: if this is supposed to describe a file format, we should look ahead and specify the alignment/padding now..  otherwise it'll be open to interpretation.

Author: Alright. An option here is to simply say it is byte-packed, but that does mean we cannot do in-memory interpretation of the elements.

Note that this is a design document and not and extension, so an argument could be made that the alignment is an implementation detail. That is not to say I'm against documenting it, but we are not specifying a format for use outside the implementation. Just to make sure we're on the same page about what this is specifying.

Reviewer 2: > An option here is to simply say it is byte-packed, but that does mean we cannot do in-memory interpretation of the elements.  
Agreed 100%.  But not necessarily a great option for the guy who has to write an optimized version that can pull an arbitrary module out of a SYCLBIN file that's storing 10,000. ;-)  Or the gal juggling a giant  in-memory rep that needs to be written quickly to file.  We can go a long way for helping both those out by avoiding `uint8_t`, or at least putting them at the end of the struct, rather than earlier , or by giving a little thought to padding/alignment .

> Just to make sure we're on the same page about what this is specifying.
I'm tots fine with that.  Maybe this isn't the time or place, and I know it's not the highest priority at this stage. But, realistically, are we really going to make ANOTHER specification doc for that exact file format?

Author: During the restructuring, I've added alignment to each of the sections, with the caveat that the contents of the byte table doesn't specify alignment. I believe that is fine, given the headers give a byte offset into the table anyway.

> | `uint8_t`  | `sycl::bundle_state` corresponding to the contents of the SYCLBIN. |                |

Author: I'm not against separating it into a new global metadata structure, but given that it would always be there I'm not sure I follow how that would effectively be any different?

> | `uint8_t`  | `sycl::bundle_state` corresponding to the contents of the SYCLBIN. |                |

Author: The values are defined a couple lines down. I think having it explicitly defined here is better, as to make it less interdependent on the SYCL definitions, which as you note may change. For the currently-defined values, they correspond 1:1 with how our headers currently define these, but if they change we would need a remapping, which should luckily be cheap.

> | `uint8_t`  | `sycl::bundle_state` corresponding to the contents of the SYCLBIN. |                |

Author: It has been moved to a separate section, but the question about how much difference it makes still stands.

> | `uint8_t`  | `sycl::bundle_state` corresponding to the contents of the SYCLBIN. |                |

Author: Are we confident that unknown global metadata will be safe for an implementation to not know? Seems dangerous to even allow that.

> | `uint8_t`  | `sycl::bundle_state` corresponding to the contents of the SYCLBIN. |                |

Author: Discussed this offline with @gmlueck - Most relevant part of the discussion was that I will investigate the possibility of making the PropertySet structure usable as the structure for all metadata.

> | `uint8_t`  | `sycl::bundle_state` corresponding to the contents of the SYCLBIN. |                |

Author: It has been moved into the property sets, as described in the new design document I've added for it.

The `sycl::bundle_state` is an integer with the values as follows:

| `sycl::bundle_state` | Value |
| -------------------- | ----- |
| `input`              | 0     |
| `object`             | 1     |
| `executable`         | 2     |

### Body

Immediately after the header is the body of the SYCLBIN file. The body consists
of a list of abstract modules.

| Type       | Description                                | Value variable |
| ---------- | ------------------------------------------ | -------------- |
| `uint64_t` | Byte size of the list of abstract modules. | `B`            |
| `B`        | List of abstract modules.                  |                |

#### Abstract module

> Each abstract module represents a set of kernels, the corresponding metadata, 0

Reviewer: I also think this description should be expanded.  One key part of the definition is that all the IR modules and native device code images inside an abstract module represent the *same* set of kernels.  That's why the metadata describing the kernels is at the abstract module level, effectively shared by all IR modules and native device code images.

The idea is that a single abstract module might have IR modules in SPIR-V and PTX format (or some subset of these formats).  The native device code images might include Intel native GPU format, SASS (for CUDA), native x86 code (for the native CPU backend), etc.

In addition, a single SYCLBIN might have several abstract modules.  For example, this could occur if the application creates a kernel bundle with two kernels, and those kernels happened to be bundled into separate modules.

Answering @AlexeySachkov: yes, all abstract modules in a SYCLBIN have the same state.

> Each abstract module represents a set of kernels, the corresponding metadata, 0

Author: I've tried to flesh out the description a little more. What do you think?

> Each abstract module represents a set of kernels, the corresponding metadata, 0

Reviewer: I like it!

##### Module metadata

The module metadata contains the following information about the contents of the
module.

| Type       | Description                                                    | Value variable |
| ---------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------- |
| `uint32_t` | Byte size of the list of kernel names.                         | `K`            |
| `K`        | List of kernel names. (String list)                            |                |
| `uint32_t` | Byte size of the list of imported symbols.                     | `I`            |
| `I`        | List of imported symbols. (String list)                        |                |
| `uint32_t` | Byte size of the list of exported symbols.                     | `E`            |
| `E`        | List of exported symbols. (String list)                        |                |
| `uint32_t` | Byte size of property set data.                                | `P`            |
| `P`        | Property set data.                                             |                |

*NOTE:* Optional features used is embedded in the property set data.

> *TODO:* Consolidate and/or document the property set data in this document.

Author: The point here is that if SYCLBIN becomes the way we represent SYCL binaries in the future, there may not be a reason to have property sets as a separate structure. As such, we could merge it into the SYCLBIN structure, keeping the documentation of these properties (which would then simply be module metadata) in the same location as the rest of this information.

##### String list

A string list in this binary format consists of a `uint32_t` at the beginning
containing the number of elements in the list, followed by that number of
entries with the format:

| Type       | Description              | Value variable |
| ---------- | ------------------------ | -------------- |
| `uint32_t` | Byte size of the string. | `S`            |
| `S`        | String bytes.            |                |

##### IR module

An IR module contains the binary data for the corresponding module compiled to a
given IR representation, identified by the IR type field.

| Type       | Description                    | Value variable |
| ---------- | ------------------------------ | -------------- |
| `uint8_t`  | IR type.                       |                |
| `uint32_t` | Byte size of the raw IR bytes. | `IB`           |
| `IB`       | Raw IR bytes.                  |                |

*TODO:* Do we need a target-specific blob inside this structure? E.g. for CUDA

>         we may want to embed the SM version.

Author: > If we are talking about a specific CUDA property, is it still IR module?

Because of the forward-compatibility of SM archs, my understanding is that we want PTX to be considered an IR type. 

> Target-specific for me means "native", i.e. as if PTX is incorrectly assumed as IR module. Also, all IR modules are expected to share the same properties within an abstract module, right? If so, then maybe we should propagate that property up to the abstract module level and have PTX modules compiled for different SM versions as separate abstract modules?

If we were to put the SM architecture information at abstract module level, I don't see how an abstract module would ever have more than one IR module and more than one native device code image. Granted, having the exact same properties is somewhat rare, but I would expect it to be the case if the user was to compile for multiple SM versions.

>         we may want to embed the SM version.

Reviewer: I agree that it seems like we would probably want to annotate the IR module with the CUDA virtual architecture in the case when the IR is PTX.  I was thinking that we would use the IR-level metadata for stuff like this.

>         we may want to embed the SM version.

Author: I've added a "target" field to the IR module metadata which contains the value of `-fsycl-targets` used for the given module, similar to "arch" in native device code images, with the exception that this key may be missing from the metadata in the case that the option wasn't specified, in which case the IR type should be enough to infer from.

##### IR types

The IR types must be one of the following values:

| IR type | Value |
| ------- | ----- |
| SPIR-V  | 0     |
| PTX     | 1     |
| AMDGCN  | 2     |

##### Native device code image

An native device code image contains the binary data for the corresponding
module AOT compiled for a specific device, identified by the architecture

> string.

Author: That is actually a good question. I am not sure what the architecture string would be for cases like SASS binaries. For example, lets say we've compiled to PTX through our compiler, then load that to a kernel-bundle, compile that kernel bundle to native device code and then serialize that to SYCLBIN. The `-fsycl-targets` would not be enough to express the architecture here, I believe.

> string.

Reviewer: In your example, the application has compiled the PTX to native code.  Wouldn't you know the native architecture when this happens?  It seems like the set of possible native CUDA architectures is a fixed set which would each map to one of the `-fsycl-targets` values.

I wonder if there is a reason to use a string for the architecture names.  Why couldn't this be an enumeration?  We use an enumeration for the device architectures in [sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture.asciidoc).

In any case, I agree with @AlexeySachkov.  I think the set of possible architectures should be specified in the file format.

> string.

Author: > In your example, the application has compiled the PTX to native code. Wouldn't you know the native architecture when this happens? It seems like the set of possible native CUDA architectures is a fixed set which would each map to one of the `-fsycl-targets` values.

I will have to do some research here. I know PTX can be associated with SM architectures, but I don't know if the same applies to the native device code produced from PTX. It may be device-specific and as such more strict than the SM version.

> I wonder if there is a reason to use a string for the architecture names. Why couldn't this be an enumeration? We use an enumeration for the device architectures in [sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture.asciidoc).

Since the compiler will need to know about these architectures too, I am reluctant to try and match enum values between the runtime and library for this purpose.

> string.

Author: I've specified that the "arch" value is the string that corresponds to the `-fsycl-targets` value used for the binary. The runtime should generally be able to convert that to the enums in [sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture.asciidoc).

> string.

Reviewer 4: > I've specified that the "arch" value is the string that corresponds to the `-fsycl-targets` value used for the binary. The runtime should generally be able to convert that to the enums in [sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture.asciidoc).

The approach works for me, but I feel like the clarification is actually missing from the doc.

> string.

Author: Good point! I've added the reference to the SYCL extension with a note about the runtime attempting to make the appropriate mapping.

| Type       | Description                                      | Value variable |
| ---------- | ------------------------------------------------ | -------------- |
| `uint32_t` | Byte size of the architecture string.            | `A`            |
| `A`        | Architecture string.                             |                |
| `uint32_t` | Byte size of the native device code image bytes. | `NB`           |
| NB         | Native device code image bytes.                  |                |

### SYCLBIN version changelog

The SYCLBIN format is subject to change, but any such changes must come with an
increment to the version number in the header and a subsection to this section
describing the change.

#### Version 1

 * Initial version of the layout.

## Clang driver changes

The clang driver needs to accept the following new flags:

<table>
<tr>
<th>Option</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>`-fsyclbin`</td>
<td>
If this option is set, the output of the invocation is a SYCLBIN file with the
.syclbin file extension. This skips the host-compilation invocation of the typical
`-fsycl` pipeline, instead passing the output of the clang-offloat-packager

> invocation to clang-linker-wrapper together with the new `--syclbin` flag.

Author: The device code modules should still be linked with the device libraries, so most of the flags should be the same. The ones we can exclude are the ones passed to the host compiler, including specifying the linker. The currently proposed initial implementation of this in the linker wrapper doesn't care if the options are there, but we may as well exclude them.

> invocation to clang-linker-wrapper together with the new `--syclbin` flag.

Reviewer 5: If the `clang-linker-wrapper` doesn't care about the rest of the options, I'm good with that.  Makes the driver implementation simpler as we would just need to pass the additional `--syclbin` option.

Setting this option will override `-fsycl` and `-fsycl-device-only`.

This option currently requires `--offload-new-driver` to be set.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>`--offload-ir`</td>
<td>*TODO*</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>`--offload-rdc`</td>
<td>This is an alias of `-fgpu-rdc`.</td>
</tr>

> </table>

Author: That extension doesn't seem to help with multi-line table cells, sadly.

in this section. The intention of defining a new format for these is to give
the DPC++ implementation an extendable and lightweight wrapper around the
multiple modules and corresponding metadata captured in the SYCLBIN file.
The content of the SYCLBIN may be contained as an entry in the offloading binary
format produced by the clang-offload-packager, as described in
[ClangOffloadPackager.rst](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/clang/docs/ClangOffloadPackager.rst).

The format of these files consist of a [file header](#file-header), containing
general information about the file, followed by three lists of headers: The
[abstract module header](#abstract-module-header) list, the
[IR module header](#ir-module-header) list and
[native device code image header](#native-device-code-image-header) list,
containing information about the [abstract modules](#abstract-module),
[IR modules](#ir-module) and
[native device code images](#native-device-code-image) respectively.

|                                                                       |
| --------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | [File header](#file-header)                                           |

Reviewer 2: Up until we hit the metadata byte table, everything here is fixed size.  Could we have  "Location|Size" columns added to this list so we can see that file header is 52 bytes, long, the abstract module header is 32 bytes, etc?

That'll help communicate where the metadata byte table should begin, for version 1.

| [Abstract module header](#abstract-module-header) 1                   |
| ...                                                                   |
| [Abstract module header](#abstract-module-header) N                   |
| [IR module header](#ir-module-header) 1                               |
| ...                                                                   |
| [IR module header](#ir-module-header) M                               |
| [Native device code image header](#native-device-code-image-header) 1 |
| ...                                                                   |
| [Native device code image header](#native-device-code-image-header) L |
| Metadata byte table                                                   |
| Binary byte table                                                     |

The headers and each byte table are all aligned to 8 bytes. The fields in the
headers use C/C++ type notation, including the fixed-size integer types defined

> in the `<cstdint>` header, and will have the same size and alignment.

Reviewer 2: Probably should state that the numbers are little endian.  Just in case someone decides to port SYCL to a 1990's era Macintosh. ;-)

other file-formats, it defines a magic number to help identify the format, which
is 0x53594249 (or "SYBI".) Immediately following the magic number is the version
number, which is used by SYCLBIN consumers when parsing data in the rest of the
file.

| Type       | Description                                                                   |
| ---------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `uint32_t` | Magic number. (0x53594249)                                                    |
| `uint32_t` | SYCLBIN version number.                                                       |
| `uint32_t` | Number of abstract modules.                                                   |
| `uint32_t` | Number of IR modules.                                                         |
| `uint32_t` | Number of native device code images.                                          |
| `uint64_t` | Byte size of the metadata byte table.                                         |
| `uint64_t` | Byte size of the binary byte table.                                           |
| `uint64_t` | Byte offset of the global metadata from the start of the metadata byte table. |

> | `uint64_t` | Byte size of the global metadata from the start of the metadata byte table.   |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `uint64_t` | Byte size of the global metadata.                                             |
```

that all device binaries in an abstract module are usable on the same device or
are specific to a single vendor.

#### Abstract module header

A abstract module header contains the following fields in the stated order:

| Type       | Description                                                                                |
| ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `uint64_t` | Byte offset of the metadata from the start of the metadata byte table.                     |
| `uint64_t` | Byte size of the metadata in the metadata byte table.                                      |
| `uint32_t` | Number of IR modules.                                                                      |
| `uint32_t` | Index of the first IR module header in the IR module header array.                         |
| `uint32_t` | Number of native device code images.                                                       |
| `uint32_t` | Index of the first native device code images header native device code image header array. |

#### Abstract module metadata

An abstract module metadata entry contains any number of property sets, as

> described in [PropertySets.md](PropertySets.md), excluding:

Reviewer 4: Not sure if this is a problem, but what if we add a new property there which cannot be applied to an abstract module?

Author: I don't think adding new cases should be a problem. It is mostly to say that these property sets have no meaning for the abstract module metadata block. I don't think it's worth checking whether they are there or not, over just skipping them.

contents of it is generally referenced by an offset specified in the headers.

### SYCLBIN version changelog

The SYCLBIN format is subject to change, but any such changes must come with an
increment to the version number in the header and a subsection to this section
describing the change.

Additionally, any changes to the property set structure that affects the way the
runtime has to parse the contained property sets will require an increase in the
SYCLBIN version. Adding new property set names or new predefined properties only
require a SYCLBIN version change if the the SYCLBIN consumer cannot safely
ignore the property.

#### Version 1

 * Initial version of the layout.

## Clang driver changes

The clang driver needs to accept the following new flags:

<table>
<tr>
<th>Option</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>`-fsyclbin`</td>
<td>
If this option is set, the output of the invocation is a SYCLBIN file with the
.syclbin file extension. This skips the host-compilation invocation of the typical
`-fsycl` pipeline, instead passing the output of the clang-offload-packager
invocation to clang-linker-wrapper together with the new `--syclbin` flag.

> Setting this option will override `-fsycl` and `-fsycl-device-only`.

Author: ```suggestion
Setting this option will imply `-fsycl` and override `-fsycl-device-only`.
```

> Setting this option will imply `-fsycl` and override `-fsycl-device-only`.

Reviewer 4: Could you please clarify what do you mean by "override `-fsycl-device-only`"? Isn't skipping host compilation _implies_ `-fsycl-device-only`?

Author: I suppose so. To some extend I think the terminology overlaps a little. They are not really mutually exclusive, it is just "`-fsycl-device-only` with more". I'll change it to just "implies". @mdtoguchi - Is there a precedence for the terminology used here?

Reviewer 5: I think the intention of the wording here is that use of `-fsyclbin` will only produce the SYCLBIN file.  Expectation of using `-fsycl-device-only` is produce just the device binary.  If they are used together, `-fsycl-device-only` is overridden from a driver function perspective.

runtime has to parse the contained property sets will require an increase in the
SYCLBIN version. Adding new property set names or new predefined properties only
require a SYCLBIN version change if the the SYCLBIN consumer cannot safely
ignore the property.

#### Version 1

 * Initial version of the layout.

## Clang driver changes

The clang driver needs to accept the following new flags:

<table>
<tr>
<th>Option</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>`-fsyclbin`</td>
<td>
If this option is set, the output of the invocation is a SYCLBIN file with the
.syclbin file extension. This skips the host-compilation invocation of the typical
`-fsycl` pipeline, instead passing the output of the clang-offload-packager
invocation to clang-linker-wrapper together with the new `--syclbin` flag.

Setting this option will override `-fsycl` and `-fsycl-device-only`.

The behavior is dependent on using the clang-linker-wrapper. As the current default
offload compilation behavior is using the old offload model (driver based), this
option currently requires `--offload-new-driver` to be set.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>`--offload-ir`</td>
<td>*TODO*</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>`--offload-rdc`</td>

> <td>This is an alias of `-fgpu-rdc`.</td>

Reviewer 5: Not much information in regards to these options and their purpose in the context of SYCLBIN.  Can these be embellished or just added later?

Author: I think `--offload-rdc` is just intended to be an alias for `-fgpu-rdc`, mainly to make the option more general. Maybe it doesn't really need to be part of this document? I think it's mostly just bikeshedding in the end.

I will remove `--offload-ir` until I know how it will actually be used. 🫡

contents of it is generally referenced by an offset specified in the headers.

### SYCLBIN version changelog

The SYCLBIN format is subject to change, but any such changes must come with an
increment to the version number in the header and a subsection to this section
describing the change.

Additionally, any changes to the property set structure that affects the way the
runtime has to parse the contained property sets will require an increase in the
SYCLBIN version. Adding new property set names or new predefined properties only
require a SYCLBIN version change if the the SYCLBIN consumer cannot safely
ignore the property.

#### Version 1

 * Initial version of the layout.

## Clang driver changes

The clang driver needs to accept the following new flags:

<table>
<tr>
<th>Option</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>`-fsyclbin`</td>
<td>
If this option is set, the output of the invocation is a SYCLBIN file with the
.syclbin file extension. This skips the host-compilation invocation of the typical
`-fsycl` pipeline, instead passing the output of the clang-offload-packager
invocation to clang-linker-wrapper together with the new `--syclbin` flag.

> Setting this option implies `-fsycl` and `-fsycl-device-only`.

Reviewer 5: Now that I see this written, what is the expectation of behavior when `-fsyclbin -fsycl-device-only` is used on the command line?  The natural behavior here is for `-fsycl-device-only` to be seen and taken advantage of, which will create the device only file and stop.  `-fsyclbin` does additional work after the device compilation.

Author: That's a good point. Maybe it would be better to issue a diagnostic if they are used together? Seems like they may not be totally related, despite there being some conceptual overlap.

Reviewer 5: I think the standard 'unused argument' diagnostic should be sufficient when used together:
```
> clang++ --offload-new-driver -fsycl-device-only -fsyclbin ~/a.cpp
clang++: warning: argument unused during compilation: '-fsyclbin' [-Wunused-command-line-argument]
```

Author: Sounds good! I've reworded this part to explicitly say that the `-fsyclbin` will be unused.

The behavior is dependent on using the clang-linker-wrapper. As the current default
offload compilation behavior is using the old offload model (driver based), this
option currently requires `--offload-new-driver` to be set.
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>`--offload-rdc`</td>
<td>This is an alias of `-fgpu-rdc`.</td>
</tr>
</table>

Additionally, `-fsycl-link` should work with .syclbin files. Semantics of how
SYCLBIN files are linked together is yet to be specified.

> ## clang-linker-wrapper changes

Reviewer 6: We are in the process of moving most of the SYCL specific functionality from clang-linker-wrapper into a new tool called clang-sycl-linker. So, this documentation will need to be updated based on that. For the purposes of this PR, we can use clang-linker-wrapper. 
Just heads up.

Author: Thanks for the heads up! Would it make sense to change it now? From a documentation POV, is it as simple as a search-and-replace or is there an important semantic difference between the tools?

> The clang-linker-wrapper is responsible for doing post-processing and linking of

Reviewer 6: What is meant by post-processing here? Thanks

Author: Module-splitting and metadata analysis/extraction mainly. I've expanded it a bit.

Some applications may want to dynamically load device binaries at runtime, e.g.
for modularity and to avoid having to recompile the entire application. However,
doing so through the
[sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_compiler](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_compiler.asciidoc)
extension can be unnecessarily expensive, if the systems utilizing this
modularity are able to compile the binaries separate from the application's
execution.

To facilitate that a new SYCLBIN format is needed to define the interface between
the compiler-produced binaries and the runtime's handling of it. This necessity
comes from the overall design of our SYCL toolchain where runtime relies on
compiler-provided information/metadata to implement various features (like
support for specialization constants or shared libraries), i.e. device code alone
is not enough.

This design document details the SYCLBIN binary format used for storing SYCL
device binaries to be loaded dynamically by the SYCL runtime. It also details
how the toolchain produces, links and packages these binaries, as well as how
the SYCL runtime library handles files of this format.

> ## SYCLBIN binary format

Author: I do agree with the general sentiment and I am open to the idea of reusing ELF as the format. However, I don't see how this format fits with ELF, as we would just be fitting bogus into a lot of the pre-defined ELF headers and sections. SYCLBIN is not an executable format per-se and to do appropriate linking the linker will have to consider the binary metadata too, which we would have to retrofit into some text section of the ELF file.

For tooling, I could see it, but are there any other tools than `llvm-objdump` (and `readelf` and `objdump`) that we would get "for free" if we used ELF? Even if we do, would users be able to get much out of the metadata without us adding additional functionality to these tool or entirely new tooling? When you mention "rich LLVM library" could you be more specific?

I've previously tried and failed to fit the SYCLBIN format into the existing ELF format in a way that isn't just what the current design is but separated into best-effort chunks in the ELF format, so please, if you have a suggestion of how to structure the format based off ELF, please do explain your thoughts.

The files produced by the new compilation path will follow the format described
in this section. The intention of defining a new format for these is to give
the DPC++ implementation an extendable and lightweight wrapper around the
multiple modules and corresponding metadata captured in the SYCLBIN file.
The content of the SYCLBIN may be contained as an entry in the offloading binary
format produced by the clang-offload-packager, as described in
[ClangOffloadPackager.rst](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/clang/docs/ClangOffloadPackager.rst).

The format of these files consist of a [file header](#file-header), containing
general information about the file, followed by three lists of headers: The
[abstract module header](#abstract-module-header) list, the
[IR module header](#ir-module-header) list and
[native device code image header](#native-device-code-image-header) list,
containing information about the [abstract modules](#abstract-module),
[IR modules](#ir-module) and
[native device code images](#native-device-code-image) respectively.

> |                                                                       |

Reviewer 7: This structure looks overcomplicated. Can be abstract modules, IR modules and device code images be unified in one entity like `offload_entry`? The type of the entity (SPIR-V, AOT and i.e) could be specified in a one global `image_table`. There already is a support of that in LLVM:
https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/c309abd92553191c404f2dc13f637bcfd53033f9/llvm/include/llvm/Frontend/Offloading/Utility.h#L27

My point here, is that we should strive to utilize the LLVM Offloading approach as much as we can and it was designed to be general.

Author: I don't understand how the linked `EntryTy` is relevant to this case? It talks about contents of a device image, but here we are talking about device images inside our own format. We could maybe combine the two entries, but it would make searching for e.g. native device code images over IR modules more difficult when going through the file and complexity-wise I don't see how it would be any different. We are very likely going to need different information for IR modules than for device binary images, so some distinction is necessary.

enumerators in the
[sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture](../extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture.asciidoc)
extension.

##### Native device code image header

A native device code image header contains the following fields in the stated
order:

| Type       | Description                                                                         |
| ---------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `uint64_t` | Byte offset of the metadata from the start of the metadata byte table.              |
| `uint64_t` | Byte size of the metadata in the metadata byte table.                               |
| `uint64_t` | Byte offset of the device code image bytes from the start of the binary byte table. |
| `uint64_t` | Byte size of the device code image bytes in the binary byte table.                  |

##### Native device code image metadata

A native device code image metadata entry contains a single property set with
the identifying name "SYCLBIN/native device code image module metadata", as
described in the
[PropertySets.md](PropertySets.md#syclbinnative-device-code-image-metadata)
design document.

> ### Byte tables

Author: Anything that doesn't have some static size (like the headers) are placed in the byte tables, which are then accessed through offsets specified in the headers. We have two byte tables: The one containing metadata (currently using the PropertySet format, but it could be any format as it is just raw bytes that are then parsed by the runtime as property sets) and one containing raw device image/IR module bytes (associated with IR modules headers or device image code headers.)

### SYCLBIN version changelog

The SYCLBIN format is subject to change, but any such changes must come with an
increment to the version number in the header and a subsection to this section
describing the change.

Additionally, any changes to the property set structure that affects the way the
runtime has to parse the contained property sets will require an increase in the
SYCLBIN version. Adding new property set names or new predefined properties only
require a SYCLBIN version change if the the SYCLBIN consumer cannot safely
ignore the property.

#### Version 1

 * Initial version of the layout.

## Clang driver changes

The clang driver needs to accept the following new flags:

<table>
<tr>
<th>Option</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>`-fsyclbin`</td>
<td>
If this option is set, the output of the invocation is a SYCLBIN file with the
.syclbin file extension. This skips the host-compilation invocation of the
typical `-fsycl` pipeline, instead passing the output of the
clang-offload-packager invocation to clang-linker-wrapper together with the new
`--syclbin` flag.

Setting this option will override `-fsycl`. Passing`-fsycl-device-only` with

> `-fsyclbin` will cause the latter will be considered unused.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
`-fsyclbin` will cause `-fsycl-device-only` to be considered unused.
```
Your choice if you want to use the option name or use `the former`

[IR module header](#ir-module-header) list and
[native device code image header](#native-device-code-image-header) list,
containing information about the [abstract modules](#abstract-module),
[IR modules](#ir-module) and
[native device code images](#native-device-code-image) respectively.

|                                                                       |
| --------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| [File header](#file-header)                                           |
| [Abstract module header](#abstract-module-header) 1                   |
| ...                                                                   |
| [Abstract module header](#abstract-module-header) N                   |
| [IR module header](#ir-module-header) 1                               |
| ...                                                                   |
| [IR module header](#ir-module-header) M                               |
| [Native device code image header](#native-device-code-image-header) 1 |
| ...                                                                   |
| [Native device code image header](#native-device-code-image-header) L |

> | Byte table                                                            |

Reviewer: I think it would be better to have a separate "property set table".  This would still be a blob of bytes, but it will be more efficient if all the property sets are collected together, just because they will be packed together into a small number of pages.

Author: I've split them into two byte tables. 👍

### File header

The file header segment appears as the first part of the SYCLBIN file. Like many
other file-formats, it defines a magic number to help identify the format, which
is 0x53594249 (or "SYBI".) Immediately following the magic number is the version
number, which is used by SYCLBIN consumers when parsing data in the rest of the
file.

| Type       | Description                                            |
| ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| `uint32_t` | Magic number. (0x53594249)                             |
| `uint32_t` | SYCLBIN version number.                                |
| `uint32_t` | Number of abstract modules.                            |
| `uint32_t` | Number of IR modules.                                  |

> | `uint32_t` | Number of native device code images.                   |

Author: I'm not a huge fan of adding padding elements. Would this not be covered by the alignment of the types?

> | `uint32_t` | Number of native device code images.                   |

Reviewer: This is a spec for a file format, not a C++ API.  There is no C++ syntax here, so there is no expectation that you will get padding by default.  If you expect there to be padding in order to align the `uint64_t`, then you need to show it explicitly.

> | `uint32_t` | Number of native device code images.                   |

Author: We can say that they are treated the same as C++/C aggregate types w.r.t. alignment and padding. That's the way they're going to be used, so it seems the easiest way to maintain it to me.

> | `uint32_t` | Number of native device code images.                   |

Reviewer: This is not how I've seen it done in other file format specs.

> | `uint32_t` | Number of native device code images.                   |

Author: Me neither, but my point of reference was https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/clang/docs/ClangOffloadPackager.rst and they don't even specify this, despite relying on it in the implementation. I can add padding explicitly, but giving it a type feels weird to me.

> | `uint32_t` | Number of native device code images.                   |

Author: I've added a section early on specifying that the fields have the C/C++ equivalent alignment and size.

| `uint64_t` | Byte size of the byte table.                           |

> | `uint64_t` | Byte offset of the global metadata in the byte table.  |

Author: Is that not covered by "in the byte table"? Seems like changing that to "in the file" would be the alternative.

> | `uint64_t` | Byte offset of the global metadata in the byte table.  |

Reviewer: I see.  I think it would be clearer to say "Byte offset of the global metadata from the start of the byte table."

that all device binaries in an abstract module are usable on the same device or
are specific to a single vendor.

#### Abstract module header

A abstract module header contains the following fields in the stated order:

| Type       | Description                                           |
| ---------- | ----------------------------------------------------- |
| `uint64_t` | Byte offset of the metadata in the byte table.        |
| `uint64_t` | Byte size of the metadata in the byte table.          |
| `uint32_t` | Number of IR modules.                                 |

> | `uint32_t` | Offset of the first IR module header.                 |

Author: Wording changed.
